.\"                              hey, Emacs:   -*- nroff -*-
.\" quakeforge is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
.\" the Free Software Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH QUAKEFORGE 1 "May 15, 2000"
.\" Please update the above date whenever this man page is modified.
.SH NAME
quakeforge \- 3D game engine based on id Software's Quake engine
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B quakeforge
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBquakeforge\fP washes your windows, mends your fences, mows your lawn...
.PP
It also...
.SH OPTIONS
\fBquakeforge\fP accepts the following options:
.TP
.BR  -i , " --interactive"
Prompt for confirmation.
.TP
.BR  -q , " --quiet" , " --silent"
Inhibit usual output.
.TP
.B  --verbose
Print more information.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Show version of program.
.\" .SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" .BR foo "(1), " bar (1)
.SH AUTHOR
The QuakeForge Project <quake-devel@lists.sourceforge.net>.
