.\"                              hey, Emacs:   -*- nroff -*-
.\" qfcc is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\" See the GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to:
.\"
.\"		Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"		59 Temple Place, Suite 330
.\"		Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins (default)
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.\"
.ds qfcc \fBqfcc\fP
.ds cpp \fBcpp\fP
.ds progs.src \fIprogs.src\fP

.TH QFCC 1 "28 April, 2004" QuakeForge "QuakeForge Developer's Manual"
.\" Please update the above date whenever this man page is modified.


.SH NAME
qfcc \- The QuakeForge Code Compiler


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qfcc
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ files ]


.SH DESCRIPTION
\*[qfcc] compiles Ruamoko source into a form that the QuakeForge engine can
understand.


.SH OPTIONS
\*[qfcc] takes the following arguments:

.TP
.B \-\-advanced
Use advanced Ruamoko features.
This is the default when using separate compilation.

.TP
.B \-C, \-\-code OPTION,...
Set code generation options.
See \fBCODE GENERATION OPTIONS\fP for details.

.TP
.B \-c
Only compile, do not link.
Can be used in either \fBprogs.src\fP or separate compilation modes.

.TP
.B \-\-cpp CPPSPEC
\*[cpp] execution command line.
See \fBCPP NAME\fP for details.

.TP
.B \-D, \-\-define SYMBOL[=VAL]
Define a symbol for the preprocessor, if it is in use.

.TP
.B \-E
Only preprocess.
No compilation or linking is done.

.TP
.B \-\-extended
Allow extended keywords in traditional mode. Otherwise, it has \fIall\fP
the implications of \fB\-\-traditional\fP.

.TP
.B \-F, \-\-files
Generate \fIfiles.dat\fP.
This list is created by checking the parameters to the precache_* functions.

.TP
.B \-\-frames
Generate \fI<source>.frame\fP files.
For each source file (listed either on the command line, or in
\fBprogs.src\fP, write a file whose name is the base name of the source
file with an extension of \fB.frame\fP, and contains a list of frame macro
names with their associated frame numbers. Eg, \fBplayer.qc\fP will produce
\fBplayer.frame\fP. Note that files that do not create frame macros will
not generate a frame file. At this time, the file is always written to the
current directory.

.TP
.B \-g
Generate debugging info.
Synonym for \fB\-\-code debug\fP.

.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show summary of options.

.TP
.B \-I DIR
Add DIR to the list of directories for the preprocessor to search when looking
for include files.

.TP
.B \-\-include FILE
Process FILE as if \fB#include "FILE"\fP appeared as the first line of the
primary source file.
See the \*[cpp] man page (\fB\-include\fP) for details.

.TP
.B \-L DIR
Add DIR to the search path used for finding libraries specified with \fB-l\fP.

.TP
.B \-l LIB
Add libLIB.a to the list of libraries to be used for resolving undefined
symbols.
\*[qfcc] expects libraries to be \fBpak\fP files of \*[qfcc]
object files built using the \fBpak\fP utility.

.TP
.B \-M, \-MD, \-MMD
Generate dependency info.
Dependent on \*[cpp] version, so check \*[cpp]'s documentation.

.TP
.B \-\-no\-default\-paths
Do not use default paths for include files or libraries.

.TP
.B \-N, \-\-notice OPTION,...
Set notice options.
See \fBNOTICE OPTIONS\fP for details.

.TP
.B \-o, \-\-output\-file FILE
Specify output file name.
In \fBprogs.src\fP mode, this overrides the output file in \*[progs.src].

.TP
.B \-\-progdefs
Generate \fIprogdefs.h\fP. Forces \fB\-\-code crc\fP.

.TP
.B \-P, \-\-progs\-src FILE
File to use instead of \*[progs.src].
No effect in separate compilation mode.

.TP
.B \-\-qccx\-escapes
Use QCCX escape sequences instead of standard C/QuakeForge sequences in
strings. See \fBESCAPE SEQUENCES\fP for details.

.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Inhibit some of \*[qfcc]'s normal output.
Specifying this option multiple times further inhibits \*[qfcc]'s output.
Counteracts the effects of \fB-v\fP.

.TP
.B \-r, \-\-relocatable
Incremental linking.
Generate a larger object file from other object files and libraries.

.TP
.B \-S, \-\-save\-temps
Do not delete temporary files.

.TP
.B \-s, \-\-source DIR
Look for \*[progs.src] in \fBDIR\fP instead of the current directory.

.TP
.B \-\-traditional
Use traditional QuakeC syntax, semantics and \*(lqbugs\*(rq.
Also implies the \fBv6only\fP, \fBno-short-circuit\fP,
\fBconst-initializers\fP and \fBno-local-merging\fP code generation options
(see \fBCODE GENERATION OPTIONS\fP).
This is the default when using \fBprogs.src\fP mode.

.TP
.B \-U, \-\-undefine SYMBOL
Undefine a preprocessor symbol, if the preprocessor is in use.

.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
Show the version of \*[qfcc].

.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Display more output than usual.
Specifying this option multiple times further increases \*[qfcc]'s output.
Counteracts the effects of \fB-q\fP.

.TP
.B \-W, \-\-warn OPTION,...
Set warning options.
See \fBWARNING OPTIONS\fP for details.

.TP
.B \-z
Compress object files when writing them.
This is especially useful when creating libraries, especially if using the
object oriented features, but can be quite slow.
This has no effect when creating \fBprogs.dat\fP.


.SH "CODE GENERATION OPTIONS"
Code generation options are processed in the order of their appearance on the
command line.
Unsupported options are ignored.
The following options are supported by \*[qfcc]'s \fB\-\-code\fP argument:

.TP
.B const-initializers
Treat initialized globals as constants.
This option is implied by \fB\-\-traditional\fP and \fB\-\-extended\fP, and is
turned off by \fB\-\-advanced\fP.

.TP
.B cow
Allow assignment to initialized globals.
When initialized globals are treated as constants (traditional Quake-C, or
when const-initializers is activated), a global that has been initialized to a
value is not a variable, but a named constant.
However, \fBqcc\fP never really enforced this.
The \fBcow\fP option allows \*[qfcc] to gracefully cope with QuakeC source
that assigns values to initialized globals in this manner.
(also known as \*(lqcopy on write\*(rq\(emlo and behold the bovine
connotations)

.TP
.B cpp
Preprocess all input files with \*[cpp].
This includes the \*[progs.src] file when used.

.TP
.B crc
Write the CRC of \fBprogdefs.h\fP to \*(lqprogs.dat\*(rq. Default for v6 progs,
otherwise defaults to off. However, \fB\-\-progdefs\fP has the effect of
forcing this option.

.TP
.B debug
Generate debug code for QuakeForge engines.
The QuakeForge engine has the ability to load line number and other debugging
information for use in diagnosing progs crashes.
This option tells \*[qfcc] to generate this information.
It is written to a secondary file with the extension \*(lqsym\*(rq\(emif your
output file is \*(lqprogs.dat\*(rq, the symbol file will be
\*(lqprogs.sym\*(rq.

.TP
.B fast\-float
Use float values directly in \*(lqif\*(rq statements.
Defaults to on.
This option is always enabled when using version 6 progs (\fBv6only\fP is in
effect).

.TP
.B local-merging
Clump the local variables from all functions into one block of data the size
of the largest group of locals, resulting in large savings of global data
space.
When off, each function's local variable block is separate from the others,
preserving the behaviour of traditional \fBqcc\fP, but using much more global
data.
This can be a problem because instructions can access addresses up to 32767 in
older servers or 65535 in most modern servers.
Defaults to off for traditional mode, and on for advanced mode.

.TP
.B promote\-float
Promote float when passed to a function that takes a variable number of
arguements. Defaults to enabled for advanced code, is forced off for
traditional or v6only code (mostly because such code does not have doubles).

.TP
.B short\-circuit
Generate short circuit code for logical operators (\fB&&\fP and \fB||\fP).
For \fBA && B\fP, if \fBA\fP is false, the expression is known to be false and
the code for \fBB\fP will not be executed.
Similar for \fBA || B\fP, but if \fBA\fP is true, the expression is known to
be true and the code for \fBB\fP will not be executed.
Defaults to off for traditional mode, and on for advanced mode.

.TP
.B single-cpp
In \fBprogs.src\fP mode, when \*[cpp] is used, produce an intermediate file
that is a series of \fB#include\fP directives, one for each source file.
This file is then passed to \*[cpp] and the resulting output is compiled in
one go.
This results in preprocessor directives in early files affecting later files,
as would be expected in \fBprogs.src\fP mode.
Without this option, each source file is independent with respect to the
preprocessor.
Has no effect in separate compilation mode.
Defaults to on.

.TP
.B vector\-calls
When a function is passed a constant vector, this causes the vector to be
passed using three float copy instructions instead of one vector copy
instruction.
This can save a good number of pr_globals where those vectors contain many
duplicate coordinates but do not match entirely.
However, this will generate slower code for such calls.

.TP
.B vector\-components
Create extra symbols for accessing the components of a vector variable or 
field. For example, \fBvector vel\fP will also create \fBvel_x\fP,
\fBvel_y\fP, and \fBvel_z\fP. Defaults to on for traditional code and off
for advanced.

.TP
.B v6only
Restrict the compiler to only version 6 progs (original Quake/QuakeWorld)
features.
This means that the compiled data file should be able to run on older servers,
as long as you have not used any QuakeForge-specific built-in functions.
Also disables compiler features (such as integers and string manipulation
support) that require extensions.
Defaults to on for traditional mode and off for advanced mode.
.PP
Any of the above can be prefixed with \fBno\-\fP to negate its meaning.


.SH "WARNING OPTIONS"
Warning options are processed in the order of their appearance on the command
line.
Unsupported options are ignored.
The following options are supported by \*[qfcc]'s \fB\-\-warn\fP argument:

.TP
.B cow
Emit a warning when the source assigns a value to a named constant.
See the description of the \fBcow\fP code generation option above for a
description of what this means.

.TP
.B error
Promote warnings to errors.

.TP
.B executable
Emit a warning when non-executable statements (eg, \fB==\fP used for
assignment) are encountered.

.TP
.B initializer
Emit a warning when too many structure/array initializer elements are given.

.TP
.B integer-divide
Emit a warning when both constants in a division operation are integers.

.TP
.B interface\-check
Emit a warning when a method is declared in an implementation but not in the
interface for a class.

.TP
.B precedence
Emit a warning when potentially ambiguous logic is used without parentheses.

.TP
.B redeclared
Emit a warning when a local variable is redeclared.

.TP
.B switch
Emit a warning when an enum value is not handled in a switch statement that
tests an enum.
Using a default label will cause all otherwise unhandled enum values to be
handled (for good or evil).

.TP
.B traditional
Emit a warning when code that should be an error is allowed by traditional
\fBqcc\fP.
Has effect only in traditional mode.

.TP
.B undef\-function
Emit a warning when a function is called, but has not yet been defined.

.TP
.B unimplemented
Emit a warning when a class method has not been implemented.

.TP
.B unused
Emit a warning for unused local variables.

.TP
.B uninited\-var
Emit a warning when a variable is read from that has not been initialized to a
value.

.TP
.B vararg\-integer
Emit a warning when a function that takes a variable number of arguments is
passed a constant of an integer type.
.PP
Any of the above can be prefixed with \fBno\-\fP to negate its meaning.
There are also two special options:

.TP
.B all
Turns on all warning options except \fBerror\fP.

.TP
.B none
Turns off all warning options except \fBerror\fP.


.SH "NOTICE OPTIONS"
Notices are used to flag code constructs that may have changed semantics but
shouldn't be treated as warnings.
They are also used for internal debugging purposes, so if you see any cryptic
notices, please report them as a bug (normal notices should be fairly
self-explanatory).

.TP
.B none
Silences all notice messages.

.TP
.B warn
Promote notices to warnings.
If warnings are being treated as errors, so will notices.
Disabling warnings has no effect on this option.


.SH "CPP NAME"
When preprocessing source files, \*[qfcc] calls \*[cpp] (the C
preprocessor) with a configurable command line.
This is useful when you wish to use an alternative preprocessor (though it
must be command line compatible with \*[cpp]) or when \*[qfcc] has been
misconfigured to call \*[cpp] incorrectly for your operating system.
If the latter is the case, please report the details (operating system,
detection methods, correct execution specification).
The base default execution spec (on most Linux systems) is
\fBcpp %d -o %o %i\fP.
This spec is similar in concept to a \fBprintf\fP string.
The name of the program may be either absolute (eg \fB/lib/cpp\fP) or relative
as the \fBPATH\fP will be searched.
Available substitutions:

.TP
.B %d
Mainly for defines (\-D, \-U and \-I) but \fB%d\fP will be replaced by all
\*[cpp] options that \*[qfcc] passes to \*[cpp]

.TP
.B %o
This will be replaced by the output file path.
Could be either absolute or relative, depending on whether \*[qfcc] is
deleting temporary files or not.

.TP
.B %i
This will be replaced by the input file path.
Generally as given to \*[qfcc].


.SH "COMPILATION MODES"
\*[qfcc] has two, mutually exclusive, modes of operation: \fBprogs.src\fP
mode and \*(lqseparate compilation\*(rq mode.
.SS "progs.src mode"
This is the traditional method of compiling QuakeC programs.
It is selected when no file arguments are given to \*[qfcc].
Note that the \fB-lLIB\fP option is considered to be a file argument.
.P
In this mode, the file \*[progs.src] is used to specify the output file name
and the input source files.
While it is customary to write each file name on a separate line, file names
are really just white-space separated strings (use double quotes around files
with spaces, though using files with spaces is a gibbing offence).
\fB//\fP is used to denote a comment.
The comment extends to the end of the current line.
The first file name in the file specified the output file name.
This may be overridden using the \fB-o\fP option.
All subsequent file names specify QuakeC source files.
.P
The source files are cumulatively compiled in the order they are listed in
\*[progs.src].
Cumulatively compiled means that all symbols other than frame macros defined in
earlier source files are visible in later source files.
Once the all source files have been compiled, the finished program is written
to the output file as a normal \fIprogs.dat\fP file.
.P
If the \fB-c\fP option is given, instead of a \fIprogs.dat\fP file, an object
file is written.
This object file can then be linked against other object files
to produce the \fIprogs.dat\fP file.
This is useful when mod extensions are in library form and converting the main
mod from \fBprogs.src\fP style to separate compilation is undesirable.
.P
\fBprogs.src\fP mode implies \fB--traditional\fP.
However, this can be overridden using \fB--advanced\fP.
.P
When \*[cpp] has not been disabled, \*[progs.src] is first passed through
\*[cpp].
The result is then parsed as above, but unless the \fBno-single-cpp\fP code
option has been given, rather than compiling each source file, an intermediate
file is generated containing a series of frame macro reset and \fB#include\fP
directives, one for each file.
This intermediate file is then passed to \*[cpp] and the resulting single file
containing all of the preprocessed source code is then compiled.
.SS "\*(lqseparate compilation\*(rq mode"
This mode is more generally useful.
It is particularly well suited to building object libraries for use in other
programs.
Separate compilation mode is automatically selected when any file arguments
(including \fB-lLIB\fP) are given on the command line.
.P
Each file argument is processed in the order given.
Files ending in \fI.r\fP, \fI.qc\fP, or \fI.c\fP (part of an experimental
hack to put qfcc support into automake) are treated as sources and compiled
to object file.
All other files (including \fB-lLIB\fP) are passed untouched to the linker
unless the \fB-c\fP is given.
If \fB-c\fP is given, then object files are ignored and the linking stage will
be skipped.
Each source file is fully independent of the others.
When linking (\fB-c\fP has not been given), any generated object files will be
deleted unless \fB-S\fP is on the command line.
However, no object file given on the command line will be deleted.
.P
When linking, if the \fB-r\fP option is given, instead of the output file being
a normal progs file, it will be an object file that can be linked against other
object files.
.P
While separate compilation mode implies \fB--advanced\fP, this can be
overridden using \fB--traditional\fP.
.P
When using \*[cpp], each source file is passed through the preprocessor
individually.
Each file is truly independent of any other file on the command line.


.SH "ESCAPE SEQUENCES"
\*[qfcc] supports a variety of string escape sequences. This includes those of
\fBqcc\fP (which are a subset of those in standard C), standard C and
\fBqccx\fP. There are some conflicts between the escape sequences, but
\fB\-\-qccx\-escapes\fP selects which set to use.
.SS Standard escape sequences:
These are the supported escape sequences from standard C, with the addition of
\(rse (escape), which would be nice if it was in standard C.

.TP
.B \(rsa
Bell character (not in quake engines). Equivalent to \(rsx07.

.TP
.B \(rsb
Backspace character (not in quake engines). Equivalent to \(rsx08. This
conflicts with \fBqccx\fP. In \fBqccx\fP, this toggles bronze characters. Use
\fB\-\-qccx\-escapes\fP to select \fBqccx\fP behaviour.

.TP
.B \(rse
Escape character (not in quake engines). Equivalent to \(rsx1b. Not actually
standard, but it should be.

.TP
.B \(rsf
Formfeed character (not in quake engines). Equivalent to \(rsx0c.

.TP
.B \(rsn
Line feed.

.TP
.B \(rsr
Carriage return. Equivalent to \(rsx0d.

.TP
.B \(rst
Tab character. Equivalent to \(rsx09.

.TP
.B \(rsv
Vertical tab. Equivalent to \(rsx0b.

.TP
.B \(rs\(rs
Backslash.

.TP
.B \(rs\'
Single quote.

.TP
.B \(rs"
Double quote.

.TP
.B \(rs?
Question mark. Avoids trigraphs in standard C, but supported for compatibility.

.TP
.B \(rs0-7
Octal character code, up to three digits. This conflicts with \fBqccx\fP. In
\fBqccx\fP, this produces gold digits. Use \fB\-\-qccx\-escapes\fP to select
\fBqccx\fP behaviour.

.TP
.B \(rs8-9
Produce gold digits.

.TP
.B \(rsx0-9A-Fa-f
Hexadecimal character code, any number of digits, but only the least
significant byte will be used.


.SS Quake character set extension escape sequences:

.TP
.B \(rsb
Toggle bronze characters. Requires \fB\-\-qccx\-escapes\fP.

.TP
.B \(rss
Toggle "bold" characters (add 0x80).

.TP
.B \(rs[
Gold [ character. Equivalent to \(rsx90.

.TP
.B \(rs]
Gold ] character. Equivalent to \(rsx91.

.TP
.B \(rs.
Center dot. Equivalent to \(rsx1c.

.TP
.B \(rs<
Turn on "bold" characters (add 0x80). This conflicts with \fBqccx\fP. In
\fBqccx\fP, this produces the separator left end. Equivalent to \(rsx1d. Use
\fB\-\-qccx\-escapes\fP to select \fBqccx\fP behaviour.

.TP
.B \(rs\-
Separator center. Equivalent to \(rsx1e.

.TP
.B \(rs>
Turn off "bold" characters (add 0x80). This conflicts with \fBqccx\fP. In
\fBqccx\fP, this produces the separator right end. Equivalent to \(rsx1f. Use
\fB\-\-qccx\-escapes\fP to select \fBqccx\fP behaviour.

.TP
.B \(rs^
Make the next character "bold" (add 0x80).

.TP
.B \(rs0-9
Produce gold digits. Requires \fB\-\-qccx\-escapes\fP (except \(rs8 and \(rs9:
they are always available).

.TP
.B \(rs(
Slider left end. Equivalent to \(rsx80.

.TP
.B \(rs=
Slider center. Equivalent to \(rsx81.

.TP
.B \(rs)
Slider right end. Equivalent to \(rsx82.

.TP
.B \(rs{0-255}
Decimal character code. Quake specific as qccx added this to allow specifying
the character code directly as \(rs0-\(rs9 were already used for specifying
gold digits.

.P
\fB\-\-qccx\-escapes\fP has no effect on sequences that do not conflict.


.SH TRADITIONAL VS ADVANCED
Compared to \fBqcc\fP, \*[qfcc] has many advanced features and is much stricter
about type checking.
\*[qfcc] also uses the same operator semantics and precedence rules as
standard \fBC\fP.
Unfortunately, this means that most older QuakeC code will not compile, or even
worse, will compile incorrectly.
.P
To address this situation, \*[qfcc] has a \*(lqtraditional\*(rq mode for
compiling old progs.
This mode, enabled with \fB--traditional\fP or by default in \fBprogs.src\fP
mode, removes the new keywords required by \*[qfcc]'s advanced features,
converts new errors to warnings, some warnings to notices and inverts
precedence order where required (eg, (!var & flag)).
Traditional mode also affects several code generation options (as always, this
can be overridden):
.IP \(bu 4
code output is restricted to version 6 progs instructions
.IP \(bu 4
short circuit boolean logic is disabled
.IP \(bu 4
each function has a private area of data for its local variables (this wastes
a lot of data space).
.P
Advanced mode is simply \*[qfcc] in its natural state.
Using \fB--advanced\fP, \*[qfcc] can be put in to advanced mode while using the
\fBprogs.src\fP compilation mode.


.SH "FAQ"

.TP
.B Where did the name Ruamoko come from?
In Maori mythology, Ruamoko is the youngest child of Ranginui, the
Sky-father, and Papatuanuku, the Earth-mother.
Ruamoko is the god of volcanoes and earthquakes.
For more information, see the Web site at <\fBhttp://maori.com/kmst1.htm\fP>.

.TP
.B qfcc hangs
This is almost always caused by qfcc incorrectly invoking \*[cpp].
Using the \fB--cpp\fP option (refer to the \fBCPP NAME\fP section above), the
correct method for invoking \*[cpp] can be specified.
Once you have found this, please send the correct \*[cpp] command line,
preferably along with the output of \fBconfig.guess\fP, to the team.

.TP
.B qfcc is singing a bad 80s rap song to me. What's going on?
\*(lqice ice baby\*(rq is QuakeForge-speak for \*(lqInternal Compiler
Error\*(rq.
It usually means there's a bug in \*[qfcc], so please report it to the team.

.TP
.B qfcc is mooing at me. What's wrong with you people?
The compiler doesn't like being treated like a slab of beef.
Seriously, the code you are trying to compile is using constants as if they
weren't.
Normally, qfcc would just stop and tell the code to sit in the corner for a
while, but you told it not to do that by passing the \fBcow\fP option to
\fB\-\-code\fP, so it has its revenge by mooing out a warning.
Or something like that.
To disable the warning, pass \fBno-cow\fP to \fB\-\-warn\fP.


.SH "FILES"
.I progs.src


.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR quakeforge (1),
.BR pak (1)


.SH AUTHORS
The original \fBqcc\fP program, for compiling the QuakeC language, was written
by Id Software, Inc.
The members of the QuakeForge Project have modified it to work with a new,
but very similar language called \fBRuamoko\fP.
